Didn't have Somerville. And I thought, gee, if
we've got that east of town, and I didn't know
whether any of that bottom land was any good or not,
well, gee, that would be great. But it never came
about. Who were Mr. Rudder's? Before I lose this
thought, talking about lakes, he was all for Lake
Somerville. And the honcho on that project was one
Hub Baker from Somerville, Texas, and his brother
Eddie. They were big heavy boys, big eaters. And
they were nearly as close with LBJ as Mr. Rudder
was. And they bought up the land around the AWOL
there and then suggested maybe that a lake would be
nice there. Well, it so happens that Overlook
Marina, which he developed and owned, happened to
be on the high prominence right next to the dam. And
so strangely enough, that dam was built. And Hub
Baker was right in the middle of the money part of
it. And somehow Mr. Rutter knew Hub. And one day,
when the dam had been built, they were going to have
a gigantic opening celebration. And Lyndon
Johnson was going to be a speaker, and Jake Pickle,
and others. And I was in the office. And Hub called
Earl Rutter and said, Earl, we're going to have
this thing over here you know Johnson's behind it
and we're behind it and all that and it's going to be
a real bone to your school. People will have places
to swim and fish and boat and ski. He said, we want
the Aggie band. He said, Hub, when is this thing
going to take place? And he said, June the 4th. And
Mr. Rudder looked at me and he says, Edwin, is there
an Aggie band on June the 4th? I said, no, sir, there
is not. there is no Aggie band in the summer. And he
reported that to Hub, and Hub just really got mad.
And he said, well, you, he said, that's your part,
Earl. He said, you got to have the music here. I
don't care. If you can't have the Aggie band, you
get something. And Mr. Rudder looked at me and
said, Edwin, you are the music director for the
grand opening of Lake Somerville. He said, you get
over there and get with Hub Baker and get that old
man off my back. And I went to about 15 meetings. And
when the the celebration took place, I had the
Glenn College Band. I had the A&M Consolidated
Band, the Bryan High School Band, the Somerville
Band, the Branham Band. We had six bands there. And
LBJ didn't show up. And they had made such an
elaborate grandstand according to Secret
Service guidelines for the president. It was two
stories high. And they had that thing built down
there, according to the specs. And boy, they're
just unbelievable specs. The one they were going
to do for President Ford, I think, on Kyle Field,
minimum cost $32,000 for the grandstand. I looked
into that
for graduation. But Hub, we went on with the
celebration. And Jake Pickle was the main
speaker. and hub had that grandstand hauled up on
the hill behind his marina screened it in and had a
two-story cabin for rent i think it's still over
there can you remember any great frustrations mr
rudder felt projects dreams he had that he wasn't
able to bring to reality
I think two of the things that were really tough to
solve
would have been the formation of Connolly Tech.
Mr. Connolly said, Earl, do something with that
place over there. He said, I'm going to make it part
of A&M, legally. And you figure out what we can do
over there. James Connolly Technical Institute.
And they hired a guy named Roy Duggar. And they
developed the program there. But how it fit in with
A&M's mission was never, ever resolved. So I think
that one was really frustrating because of his
allegiance versus what in the hell are we going to
do with a technical institute? And then the other
one would have been A&M Galveston. I can't
remember exactly when that started. I don't. But,
you know, it's still
a... Lots of vice presidents have really worried
over that one. Who does it belong to? Is it a college
or is it on its own? And those were two things that I
know that he really worried about because he
didn't He really, I think, a real frustration was
there were those that wanted A&M to be all things to
all people. And his feeling really truly was it's
at College Station, Texas. Now, you left his staff
in 67. In 67, I became director of civilian student
activities. And his charge to me was simple. He
said, I don't want to lose you in this office. But
we're going to have all these civilian students.
And I want you to go over there and study and think
and talk and find out what we can do to give them a
flagpole to rally around. And one of the first
things I did was visit LSU, Penn State, Purdue, and
VPI, which were land grant schools. I said, what do
you do with non-core students? And we developed
the resident hall program. And boy, it hit the fan
when he found out that it was going to cost some
money. But in my report to him, I showed him how we
could finance it through student activity fees
legally. And it wasn't really that much money. And
I said, if you don't want to do it all at once, let's
put names on those dormitories instead of
numbers, instead of dorm. 16 let's make it Davis
Gary Hall which put the name up that's the first
thing and we did that and I said we'll get three
pilot dormitories and we'll get one of each kind of
dorm we have namely Leggett Walton and Davis Gary
and see if it will work there and get the students to
help. Set up a resident advisor program. Instead
of one guy responsible for 250 yahoos, we'd have
four or five student employees in there. And set up
the first residence hall program. And I think not
many people know that that was my baby. and uh and
how it happened and so forth and uh to see it still
alive now is something that i take pride in one of
the things i wanted to give you is for the archives
here's my report to president rutter on
establishing the uh residence hall program this
goes to the archive that goes to the world great
that's the only And it has the financing and who we
took up to Lake Buchanan and had a retreat,
including Charles McCandless and Atlantis Hope.
But there's how the whole thing got started right
there. And that I have no more use for here. And that
should be in the archives. All right. Just a couple
of things before we break for lunch. We now know
when Mr. Rudder died. Were you, as a person that
worked with him closely, were you aware of any
declining health on his part not long before his
attack? At the moment of his attack was the second
time that I had resigned from the university. I did
it twice, once before coming to his office and once
after doing this work. I was frustrated about the
future and a lot of things, and I again left. And
while I was gone, I was with the American Oil
Company in Bryan. And when he had all that problem,
I was not on campus. And then Mr. Heaton was made
dean, and they wanted a director of admissions,
and that's when I came back. And that's after Mr.
Heaton. That's after. And I have a real fine letter
from Frank Hubert and one from Horace Byers.
thanking me for helping with, even though I didn't
work there any longer, helping with certain
aspects of the funeral service. Dick Bernard was
his assistant at that time. All right. Summarize
your feelings about Earl Rudder.
If you would allow me, I would say if you put the two
together of Jack Williams and Earl Rudder, two
very different types of personalities, we have in
that combination
I think maybe a gift from heaven in the two of them.
One, finishing, in a sense, what the other one
started and knowing how to do it. The academic part
that was a frustration to Mr. Rutter, Williams
knew. But he was hard-headed, stubborn, sweet,
mean.
could be sarcastic, but was probably the single
most important man in the history of the school
based on what he visioned and having the good sense
to go to academic type people and say, where should
we be? Knowing that he couldn't do that himself, he
went to people that could. So with the action he
started, his willingness to go into the changes,
the dramatic changes of the 60s, his willingness
to go along and support it, though it wasn't really
the way he wanted it, shows the bigness of the man.
And he had the background and the friends out there
to get the job done any day. I'm sure he did
it. Let's chat now about Jack Kenny Williams. You
had, in 67, gone over to admissions. Yeah,
director of admissions. And so let's cover that.
Did you follow Mr. Heaton immediately? Yes. And
now, wait a minute. Let's see.
I was director of admissions. Mr. Heaton was dean.
Oh, OK. So when you go. Williams came in, and
Williams asked Buckwires who a person would be
that would be a good assistant for him. He
recommended me, and I went over there, leaving
director of admissions position. And Mr. Heaton
said he was the only person in the world that ever
called me Eddie. Nobody has ever called me Eddie.
He says, Eddie, I just want you to find a person to
take your place, someone as good as you've been. I
said, OK. So I somehow made contact with Billie
Jean Lay. And it worked out just beautifully. Bill
made a fine director of admissions. And then I
served two years. And then Mr. Heaton retired. And
I think you were probably helpful with me getting
into that position. And so I left the president's
office and became dean of admissions. Let's go
back, though, when you first went over to work with
Mr. Heaton. What was the search process, as far as
you know? You mean for me to? Yeah, how did? The
search process was Bob Lacey saying to Mr. Heaton,
We sure miss old Cooper here on campus. We need to
get him back. And Mr. Heath says, would you go talk
with Eddie and see if he? Well, I was dying for a job
on campus. And that just worked perfectly. So I'm
sure that Bob Lacy is the one. I think he said
something like, don't hire anybody but Cooper.
That's what he said. Describe this man. How long
had he been there? What was he like? He had been
there since 1936.
And he was the most conservative,
gentlemanly type of man that I have ever known.
Deep East Texas, from a big family.
Dressed to the T, I'll never forget taking some
catalogs to him on a Saturday morning. He was
mowing the grass and had on a long-sleeved white
shirt and a tie tucked in between the buttons while
he was mowing.
He
worried about everything. He worried about the
women wearing slacks while at work. until someone
pointed out to him that when they bent over in a
skirt to open the lower file cabinet that actually
a lot of flesh was exposed. And at that point, he
agreed, well, maybe they should be allowed to wear
slacks at work.
He was of the old school that felt that it would be
terrifying to let this place grow too rapidly. And
he took a great pride in reporting to the president
that it would look like we probably are going to be
up 100 to 150 students this year. And that just
tickled him to death. The part about girls coming
in, he was so alarmed about that that it took three
years for him to agree to finally put something in
the catalog that wives of, well, That never was put
in there, I don't think. And finally, after the
third year, they said all students were admitted
equally. And he was under great suspect of any
faculty wife, for example, that came in. He just
formed a moral judgment on each one of them. And he
stayed awake at night worrying about somebody
fooling him about whether or not they really were
eligible to be admitted. set him back and he was
generally opposed to international students and
did everything he could really to make them
unwelcome. And you had a lot of leeway there
because it's a judgment call. From one country, a
grade of 10 on a transcript is excellent. On
another, that's about as low as you can get and who
is to argue with it? Not many people know how to
argue with that. He was ultra-conservative about
staff people, wanted to work with as few as humanly
possible. The admissions people were always
overworked. They'd stay up there until 7 or 8
o'clock at night trying to keep up with the
applications once coeducation came along and so
forth. And the foreign students, when I went in
there, nobody really was in charge. And there's an
interesting story, sideline there. Jack
Williams called me down one day and he said, do you
believe in honoring commitments that other
people have made? I said, generally, yes. He said,
well, L.F. Peterson told Lloyd Taylor that if he
went to Tarleton and was athletic director and
coach there and it worked and they got a big program
going and people actually paying to see football
games, that that would be a great service for the NM
system. And it worked out where Jesus himself
could not have gotten a first-class football
program at Tarleton. And it cost Lloyd most of his
stomach in turmoil and what do you call a stomach
problem?
the ailment that you get when your stomach is
ulcerated and so forth. At any rate, they removed
most of his stomach. And that didn't work. So he
called through his own little way to find out if Mr.
Peterson's promise that he could always come back
to A&M, if anybody was going to uphold that, though
Mr. Peterson was gone. And Williams explained all
of that to me. And he said, did you know all that? And
I said, no, sir, I did not. And he said, well, I'm
going to honor the promise that was made in good
faith. He said, is there some way that you could
work him into a spot in your organization where he
would do good work? I said, you bet. So we met at the
circle at the elite cafe in downtown Waco. And I
said, Lloyd, would you be interested in taking
over the admission of international students? I
need some strength there. And he agreed to and did a
fine job and offered to take three or four Iranians
out into the hallway and settle matters bare
knuckles if that's what they really wanted. And
the word got out pretty well that you don't fool Mr.
Taylor. So I deviated, but that was it. In all of
your years where you were responsible at whatever
level for admissions. Was it common for some
higher administrator to let you know that a
certain student was to be admitted regardless of
their qualifications? I don't think I ever had a
president or a vice president say to me, Or Bob
Cherry is the one that had the most calls because
the regents, I used to get mad at him, but that
wasn't fair because they put it on him. I finally
had an agreement even with Bob Cherry. I said, when
you get under pressure like that, kind of stall a
little bit and then let me come back to you and tell
you after we study this case whether we think the
child has a chance to stay until Halloween. That
was the date I used. I said, now I'm going to tell you
what I think, but I understand the pressure you're
under, and we might have to swallow this one, but
I'm going to tell you what I think. And do you know
that most of the time he'd go back and say to Royce or
whoever it was, Cooper says, I don't think that
child is going to last until Halloween because
XXX. And nine out of ten times he'd say, well,
forget it. So I can't say I had a, but I did have a lot
of pressure on the first grievous error I ever made
that I will admit, and that is getting housing on
campus for students who were not entitled to it.
And I got the reputation for being able to do that,
and it came down on me like bricks. Housing was the
biggest issue. problem I faced in terms of tying it
in with admission. They would say things like, how
can you admit my granddaughter and then tell her
that she has to live in Bryan? How can you do that?
That was the toughest thing. And the president's
office even said, OK, no more exceptions on
housing. If you get them, you just let us know and
we'll decide. And that didn't work. Because that
put the president's office in a very, very awkward
situation. And they found out very quickly that
it's not an easy thing to manage. Veterinary
admissions were not your worry. That's correct.
Nor medical school. Nor medical school. And the
other majors. And the graduate students, of
course. We processed, Ms. Dean processed it. But
the department and deans made the decisions. And
be it architecture, engineering, or whatever,
those were decided internally once the student
was in the institution. So you didn't have to worry
much with those. That's right.
Let's see. During those years that you were over
there either the first or second time, who were the
key people in the area of registrar the registrars
and director admissions areas
just one minute i can i've got that here for you
born around the world when that one died
Remember
when I got you to make that speech? We had dinner at
your house. I'll be over there.
Art, describe these people and their
characteristics. Bob Lacy. Bob Lacy was, above
all other things, loyal.
And when it came time to look at computerized
registration, we were way ahead of most schools.
And he went to places like Purdue and BYU and
learned the system and came back all excited. And
he said, he always called me Dean Cooper, though we
were very close friends. He said, within a year or
two, there will not be a paper in this office.
Everything will be on computer. And I said, Bob?
Not as long as I have this job. I said, we can
register on computer, but I want you to know that as
long as I'm here, there will be a piece of cardboard
down in the basement with the grades recorded on
it. We're going to have a paper backup and I don't
want somebody coming in and saying the system is
out and it ate everything in there. I'm not going to
do that. So I think it's still that way, but Bob
Lacey would do anything within reason. And yet he
would put up good arguments. And I could say, now,
Bob, you're right. We shouldn't do this. But let me
tell you the spot I'm in. And this vice president or
this former student has asked us if we would do
this. And I'm telling you, for the long run, I think
we better do it. OK, that's the answer. And then he
would go to Don Carter under him and tell Don to do
it. And Don would go through a swamp of alligators
with .50 calibers overhead and just say, which way
are we supposed to go? Rough as he could be in many
ways around the edges, Don Carter is probably the
most dedicated guy that I've ever had working for
me. He could make people mad because he was
brusque, but he would do whatever you asked him to
do. Once he decided that that's the way it was going
to be, then he'd start fussing. And he grew up in a
big urban city named Splendora. Splendora, where
the most exciting day of the year was the opening
day of squirrel season. So he could go out and hunt
his beloved limb rats. Now, let's see, and Miss
Mitchell. Miss Mitchell was a study unto herself.
She minced no words. was so dedicated that one day
when she collapsed on the floor by her desk and had
an intestinal ailment, flu of some sort that
caused her to collapse, we sent across, we were in
Heaton Hall and got the, Pat, I think was his last
name, one of the administrators to come over and he
gave her a shot and she started feeling a little
better but still couldn't get up. reached up onto
the desk and pulled a stack of transfer
applications to the floor with her and continued
her business until noon on the floor with a red
pencil. The most dedicated human I've ever seen,
but did it by the step, piece by piece, course by
course, and if it took 40 hours, that's what she
did. Now, she worked her entire adult life, didn't
she, for you? She was born on the NM campus in one of
the old faculty houses. Her husband was in the math
department and bought up some property, and she
was well-fixed all of her life. And she just loved
that work, and she knew transfer admissions
better than anybody in Texas, without question.
And I believe that... And could make people mad. I
believe the sale of her estate possessions is
tomorrow. Yeah, right. I think there is one. Her
mouth would get her in trouble once in a while. She
could be so blunt. Some little girl, I said, please
help this young lady. Dr. Williams has called
about her, and she is a house guest at the Williams
right now, and I'd like for you to put hers on top of
the stack. And then she said to the little girl
something like, well, I guess you know you
wouldn't be here if you weren't the president's
pet or something like that. And Jack Williams came
over to my office and broke through the door
without knocking. He says, who is Caroline
Mitchell? I said, Dr. Williams, you don't want to
know. I said, tell me what you want me to do and I will
do it. So we got an apology. All right, let's go to
Williams. You were not part of his staff
immediately. When did you first interact with
him? What was your first impression?
He brought a word of greetings to the faculty at,
what function was it at G. Raleigh White? Was it a,
what function was it? Was it, could it have been the
Faculty Achievements Award? No, that would have
been too late. Because he began November 1, 1970.
Mr. Rutter died in March. And Williams is here
November 1, 1970. And I came very quickly, became
his assistant. And that's what I was when I went to
this program. And he told his famous joke about the
bricklayer that kept going up and down. Yes, yes. I
thought, what a delightful human being in terms of
holding an audience totally in his grasp. And he
said just the right things to the academic group
that was there. And I said, we're off and running.
We've got a sure enough winner here. And of course,
that position solidified. The thing that I
learned about him
is that he was really temperamental. but was able
generally to hold his tongue until he was out in the
hallway. But one, for example, I had to meet him at
the regent's headquarters in their new quarters
one time to go from there somewhere else as soon as
he got out of that session, closed session. And we
got outside the building, and he was livid. And he
never did tell me what they did or said that upset
him so badly. But his only comments to me, he was
really, really as mad as I've ever seen him. And he
said, do you know the difference between Texas A&M
and the University of Hell? I said, what is it? He
says, they have two sets of regents at the
University of Hell. But his patience would wear
thin when he was under pressure. And he had people
like me that he could explode in front of and vent
some of the anger that he had. He got a letter that
was about eight pages long from a local minister
who had read in the battalion that the university
was cutting down all the greenery on campus. What
they were doing was moving some old hedges out of
the way at a stop sign by the YMCA so you could see
oncoming traffic. But the kids at the bat saw this
machine digging out this plant. They assumed that
we were just going to take out all the trees, and
that's the way This guy read it in the battalion
that we were doing away with all green space on
campus. And this preacher wrote about an
eight-page letter fighting mad. And Dr. Williams
waited about three days to answer it.